---
layout: post
title: Creating Tables in Oracle SQL
subtitle: Basic syntax overview
date: 2022-03-03 21:30:00 +0900
background: '/img/bg-post.jpg'
category: "database"
tags: [oracle sql, sql, database]
---


### Basic Syntax
```sql
CREATE TABLE tablename (
    col1 data_type col_constraint,
    col2 data_type col_constraint,
    ...
    table_constraint
);
```

For example:
```sql
CREATE TABLE authors (
    author_id NUMBER GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY (CACHE 500),
    firstname VARCHAR2(50) NOT NULL,
    lastname VARCHAR2(50) NOT NULL,
    age NUMBER,
    PRIMARY KEY (author_id)
);
```

### Types of Identity Columns
Identity columns are similar to the `AUTO_INCREMENT` column in MySQL. Here are the different options that can be used.

`GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY`: value is automatically generated, and no other value can be specified.  
`GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY`: value is automatically generated if no column value is specified. NULL value cannot be assigned.  
`GENERATED BY DEFAULT ON NULL AS IDENTITY`: value is automatically generated if a no value, including NULL, is set.

**Sequence Generator Attributes**
* `CYCLE`: when the max value is reached, it will restart, starting with the min value  
* `CACHE [num]`: stores a certain number of values in the cache for fast retrieval
* `START WITH [num]`: specify the starting value (1 by default)  
* `INCREMENT BY [num]`: specify the increment value between each identity (1 by default)  

The full list of attributes can be found [here](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/other-databases/nosql-database/19.1/java-driver-table/sequence-generator-attributes.html).


### Tables vs Views
Views are basically virtual tables that are composed of subset data, i.e. results from queries, obtained from one or more tables. 

#### When to use views instead of tables?
* We can use views to get a more consolidated view of the data by combining rows and columns from multiple tables. 
* It can also be used for security reasons by giving users access to the data without direct access to the base tables.
* It can also be a way to provide backward compatibility to apps that are using the database